---
layout: post
title:  "Name DB Generator: Extract Names from Text using NLTK"
date:   2018-04-1 16:16:01 -0600
categories: Project
author: jj
---

This python script uses NLTK to extract names from a provided text file and shows them in a searchable format along with the context the name is used in and the sentiment of the sentence. 

<!-- more -->

There are two difficult problems in Computer Science and Life: Cache invalidation and Naming things. I put this script together to help me name my daughter. The results of this script when run on the Bible are viewable here: [http://namedb.herokuapp.com/](http://namedb.herokuapp.com/)

There are two pieces to this Project:

### Part 1: Name Extractor Python Script

The first step is to pull out and store the list of names in the text. We do this with a python script using **NLTK's Vadar library** and store the extracted names into an SQLite database. 

For my purposes, I used the json formatted bible found [here](https://github.com/honza/bibles/blob/master/ESV/ESV.json) as input text. You can ofcourse point the script to any text you wish.


Some mistakes are seen in the extract of names:

* Plurals and singular variants of the same name are recongized as different names.
* NLTK detects a lot of words as proper nouns though they are not names. For example, the words: Accordingly, Afterward, Affliction and Against were all detected as nouns.
* The Vadar library certainly isn't tuned for Bibilical English as some very negative sentences are detected as 'neutral'

NLTK and Vadar aren't perfect, but they still did a decent job getting a majority of the names out and it's a decent place to start for sentiment analysis as well.

[View Source for Name Extractor on Github](https://github.com/alterlife/biblename-dbgenerator)


### Part 2: Express UI

The second part is an ExpressJS UI for the database so that the names can be viewed and browsed through easily.

[View Source for NameDB UI on GitHub](https://github.com/alterlife/namedb-ui) 